Off trail for a few days, so a longer update.

First of all, the trail has been unimaginably beautiful - I’d call it picturesque but there’s an uncapturable thing about the way the Sierra Nevada mountains look, and the experience of walking through such a landscape. The best way I can describe it is that I feel like a giddy child exploring Plato’s ideal plane of forms, the source of some perfection not attainable on Earth, except perhaps in hidden and sacred places. To be honest, I’ve taken significantly fewer photos than I might otherwise because every new view is stunning and it feels futile to try to capture either the volume or magnitude of it all. 

It’s also an extremely punishing trail. The sun is brutal - every bit of exposed skin just gets absolutely toasted. My lips are cracked, my hands are blistered, my face makes it obvious that I haven’t been as diligent about sunscreen as I should. In many segments the trail is rocky, often covered in scree or loose gravel that threaten to slide out from under you if your weight shifts too far in the wrong direction. The path twists and turns and seems to almost always be ascending or descending. The sum of all this is that the hike becomes a constant mental exercise in the mathematics of where to shift your weight and how to deploy your trekking poles to maintain your stability.

And then there’s the altitude. 

I’ve never been at high enough altitudes to get altitude sickness before, so I spent a ton of time researching it before the trip. The scary thing is that there is no real way to know how your body will respond to it before you get there - some people are much more prone to side effects of altitude than others, and physical fitness plays no role in whether you get altitude sickness. The best you can do is try to spend time acclimatizing, ascend slowly, and take Diamox, which helps you adapt to altitude. It does this by causing your kidneys to excrete bicarbonates, which makes your blood acidic and tricks your brain into making you breathe more deeply than you need. It also makes you piss a bunch and makes sodas taste flat. Science is wild. 

For this trip, where I’ll likely be sleeping above 10k feet often, I spent a couple nights acclimating at 8000 and 9000 ft and started Diamox 2 days before my ascent. I felt the altitude intensely even before the hike - the first three nights at altitude I couldn’t force myself to eat, and my sleep was sparse; 3-4 hours a night on average. I started the hike in Tuolomne Meadows at approximately 9000 feet, and my second day ascended Donohue Pass at 11,060 feet, thinking with every step that it was the highest I’d ever been above sea level.

Saturday evening, coming down from Donohue Pass, I began to feel a headache. I was absolutely wiped, so I stopped a couple miles short of my intended target for the day and made camp. As I pitched my tent and cooked dinner, I felt myself begin to get lightheaded and increasingly fatigued. Since I recognized the symptoms of altitude sickness, I texted the doctor line on my satellite communicator while I made myself shovel down plain ramen (skipping the pad Thai seasonings I’d packed, as I’d found it easier to eat unseasoned food thus far). Their advice was to rest for 24 hours and descend if symptoms persisted. 

That wasn’t an option. I had 2 days of food, which was enough to make it to my next resupply 20 miles down the trail if I kept hiking, but not enough to give me budget for a rest day. I decided to start down the trail next morning and to assess within the first mile or so whether descent was warranted. I’d be hitting a lot of climb early, so I figured the trail would tell me what to do.

And it did. I woke up the next morning as fatigued and weak as I’d been the night before, even with the miracle of a full night’s sleep for the first time in nearly a week. Breaking camp I was lightheaded again and easily winded. My hands and wrists felt tingly and weak. 

As I refilled my water for the morning, I chatted with a nearby camper, a British man hiking the JMT southbound with his niece. We’d been leapfrogging each other the day before, and he mentioned he was extremely beat even though he’d been able to train at altitude for the trek. I asked him if he felt as badly as I did. He did, so I figured there was a chance it was just fatigue and I’d find my legs for the day once I got a mile or so in. 

That was not in the cards. As I made my way forward, I felt myself descending into a slow delirium, struggling for breath after short climbs and getting confused about which way I’d been going. The disorientation was particularly concerning to me - in some cases, disorientation can be caused by a swelling of the brain in severe forms of altitude sickness. Left untreated, this can of course kill you.

I made the call to turn around. 

Our campsite the previous night was located at the junction of the JMT and the Rush Creek Trail, which would take me down in altitude quickly and into the town of June Lake. As I descended, my hands stopped tingling, the headache dissipated, and my thoughts grew less panicked and confused. The fatigue and shortness of breath remained, keeping my progress slow, but I slowly made my way out and down, catching views of several mountain lakes and a waterfall or two. I made camp for the night in a car campground - my mom had called ahead and snagged a site for me, bless her - and had a shower that is probably best described as a religious experience. 

I’m writing this post from a cheap hotel in Mammoth Lakes, where I’m holed up until Thursday, when the doctors have cleared me to return to action. One of my other big sabbatical projects is a couple of creative endeavors I’ve had backburnered - some writing and some music. Going to take the opportunity to put in a few days of work on those while I recuperate. I am still, and I cannot emphasize this enough, having a wonderful time. 

At the top of Donohue Pass, I met a hiker several months into the Pacific Crest Trail, which spans 2,653 miles across the US from Mexico to Canada. As we looked out over the vast expanse of the High Sierra, he handrolled a cigarette and we chatted about the trail. I mentioned I had a leisurely itinerary planned due to my sabbatical, and he replied, “Yeah, the JMT is a short trail, you should really take your time and stretch it out if you can.” 

Well, here we are. 